Add ADR for storing responses in the query string (#5212)
alphagov/smart-answers: docs/arch/002-store-responses-in-query-string.md

# ADR 2: Store responses in query string

## Background

> At the time of writing Smart Answer's has two methods of storing user responses: appending to the URL path or saving to the user's session cookie.

Reviewer: Would using `answer` instead of `response` be better I wonder?

Author: Do you mean:
```suggestion
At the time of writing Smart Answer's has two methods of storing user answers: appending to the URL path or saving to the user's session cookie.
```

Is the use of "response" confusing? Happy to update if so, otherwise if it still makes sense I'll leave it.

```suggestion
At the time of writing Smart Answer's has two methods of storing user responses: appending to the URL path or saving to the user's session cookie.
```

Reviewer: No, not confused - but there is a subtle semantic difference.  A response can be nothing - you can choose not to respond or do so in a non-written/verbal way (smile, laugh, frown or shrug for example).  This seems to make "response" feel somewhat optional in nature.  "Answer" on the other hand is demanding and feels more urgent and  mandatory in nature.  In smart-answers the user has no choice.  If they want the results - they must answer the questions.  I don't think this should block, so I'll approve and resolve this conversation.

> The original and most used method is appending responses to the URL path, for example `gov.uk/flow-name/y/response1/response2/response3`. This generates an array of responses that Smart Answers uses to resolve which question or outcome needs to be displayed.

Reviewer: Is it worth clarifying that the questions are not stored on the URL?

Author: Added

```ruby
session = {
  'flow-name': {
     'question1': 'response1',
     'question2': 'response2',
     'question3': 'response3',
     }
}
```

When Smart Answer's was originally built the use of session was thought to be unnecessary as user data expected to be handled wasn't sensitive. The reasoning for appending to the URL path instead of using a query string is unclear.

## Problem

There are several drawbacks from using the URL path to store user responses:

1. There is no information within the URL to indicate which page the user is requesting. This makes it impossible to understand which page is being displayed to the user, without knowing internal logic of a particular flow. This is problematic for understanding user analytics, request logs and debugging. Our current user analytics determine which page is displayed to a user from content within the page (e.g. heading text). This is fragile as content changes and cumbersome as we have to update our analytics logic when we change the content. As for request logs, there is no easy way to calculate metrics per page as multiple request URLs may resolve to the same page.

> 1. It is difficult to generate URLs with pre-populate responses, for example `/flow-name/y/response1/response2/<pre-populated-response>`. Unless the response is for the first question in a flow, it requires pre-filling responses for all former questions which are unlikely to be known. 

Author: Good question! So I've been looking at the rough implementation, and initially wrote it query string parameters that didn't match any of the question in the flow were stripped out (instead of being overly trusting).

For example given a flow the following question:
What is you age? (age) -> What is your nationality? (nationality) -> Are you employed? (employed)

`/flow_name/s/nationality?age=18&random=blah` ->  `/flow_name/s/employed?age=18&nationality=british`

However, query parameters for valid questions would persist 

`/flow_name/s/age?employed=yes` -> `/flow_name/s/nationality?age=18&employed=yes`

This would cause an issue if we needed to have custom query parameter to persist through the flow e.g. (`utm=facebook` for GA maybe?). However, we haven't had the need so far and probably easy to fix if the need did arise.

> 1. It is difficult to generate URLs with pre-populate responses, for example `/flow-name/y/response1/response2/<pre-populated-response>`. Unless the response is for the first question in a flow, it requires pre-filling responses for all former questions which are unlikely to be known. 

Author: I'll write a bit more in the proposal section about this behaviour, if that seems sensible?

> 1. It is difficult to generate URLs with pre-populate responses, for example `/flow-name/y/response1/response2/<pre-populated-response>`. Unless the response is for the first question in a flow, it requires pre-filling responses for all former questions which are unlikely to be known. 

Reviewer 2: Yup sounds good, I think stripping out any query strings we don't expect is the right approach. Even UTM ones, if we persisted them it'd actually distort analytics as it would give the impression of an arrival on a page when there wasn't one.

> 1. Changes to a flow can cause issues with previously cached pages. As URLs are not deterministic for a particular page, changes to a flow can alter which page is displayed. For example, a given flow displays an outcome page for the path `/x/y/z`. A question is removed and the flow now shows an outcome page for the path `/x/y`. The cache would continue to return the old question and users would then be redirected to `/x/y/z`, which is no longer a valid path and could result in an error if it was not also cached.

Author: I think so - maybe this table explains it a bit better?

| Page                                            | URL Path                                                               | Query String                                                                                                          |
|-------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Question 1                                      | /                                                                      | /q1                                                                                                                   |
| Question 2                                      | /x                                                                     | /q2?q1=x                                                                                                              |
| Question 3<br />   (Removed - but still cached) | /x/y                                                                   | /q3?q1=x&q2=y                                                                                                         |
| Outcome<br />  (Uncached)                       | /x/y/z <br /><br />   (Would be an invalid path if page wasn't cached) | /result?q1=x&q2=y&q3=z<br /><br />   (Would still work if uncached, as Smart Answers would ignore extra q3 parameter) |

It might not going to fix all caching issues, but I think there's defo some cases it'll help. 

A bigger issue with caching (I forgot to mention) it's currently incredibly difficult/ infeasible to clear caches for smart answers because there are so many possible URLs for a particular page when we store responses as the URL path.

> 1. Changes to a flow can cause issues with previously cached pages. As URLs are not deterministic for a particular page, changes to a flow can alter which page is displayed. For example, a given flow displays an outcome page for the path `/x/y/z`. A question is removed and the flow now shows an outcome page for the path `/x/y`. The cache would continue to return the old question and users would then be redirected to `/x/y/z`, which is no longer a valid path and could result in an error if it was not also cached.

Reviewer: Might be worth nothing this situation also happens when the questions are not moved, but the answer is changed.  For example: `/x/y/z` - becomes `/x/y/a` where `z` was `Yes` and `a` is `Yes, but...`

Author: Oh yeah - that too! I think there are probably lots of weird caching situation that this may help with. I hope the general gist comes across that changes to  cached flows can cause problems.

> 1. Changes to a flow can cause issues with previously cached pages. As URLs are not deterministic for a particular page, changes to a flow can alter which page is displayed. For example, a given flow displays an outcome page for the path `/x/y/z`. A question is removed and the flow now shows an outcome page for the path `/x/y`. The cache would continue to return the old question and users would then be redirected to `/x/y/z`, which is no longer a valid path and could result in an error if it was not also cached.

Reviewer 2: Thanks for explaining further. I can see how that situation would help there but I don't really think it helps much in the scale of the confusion a changing smart answer and cache can cause. No biggie though, as I know this is more of a tangential aspect.

> A bigger issue with caching (I forgot to mention) it's currently incredibly difficult/ infeasible to clear caches for smart answers because there are so many possible URLs for a particular page when we store responses as the URL path.

Yup 😬  - not a problem for this chat but I wonder if we'd benefit from a much shorter cache time like 60s for Smart Answers

> 1. We lose existing responses if the user visits an earlier question. To view a previous or earlier question, responses need to be removed from the URL. This means that it is impossible to change a previous response without re-answering all subsequent questions. This can be a particular burden for users if the flow is long to complete, requires complex input (e.g. dates) or information that isn't memorised.

Author: Yup, was thinking how this relates the navigation change. I think even if we remove the "change you answers" link, in favour of a back button - we still cause friction as the user begins to re-answers question.

And I see we want to address that the following behaviour:
>Re-visiting a previously answer question should have the value pre-filled (it looks like there is a bug to fix in this for /find-coronavirus-support) - (Acceptance criteria)

I'm not sure this is currently possible with storing responses in the URL path - as we permanently lose previous responses when the user navigates back.

> 1. We lose existing responses if the user visits an earlier question. To view a previous or earlier question, responses need to be removed from the URL. This means that it is impossible to change a previous response without re-answering all subsequent questions. This can be a particular burden for users if the flow is long to complete, requires complex input (e.g. dates) or information that isn't memorised.

Reviewer 2: > I'm not sure this is currently possible with storing responses in the URL path - as we permanently lose previous responses (needed to pre-fill) when the user navigates back.

We achieve that enough for the story with the query string of previous_response is supported, i.e: https://www.gov.uk/marriage-abroad/y/afghanistan/uk?previous_response=partner_british - but, of course, there is the annoying caveat that you would then need to refill in later questions again.

The caveat is you then lose that when you click to the next question but I see

> 1. We lose existing responses if the user visits an earlier question. To view a previous or earlier question, responses need to be removed from the URL. This means that it is impossible to change a previous response without re-answering all subsequent questions. This can be a particular burden for users if the flow is long to complete, requires complex input (e.g. dates) or information that isn't memorised.

Author: Sorry, yup I meant to say when you later refill questions. But great, sounds like this may provide potential enhancement to the navigation behaviour.

Additionally, the implementation of storing user responses in a session required the creation of a seperate controller `SessionAnswersController`, separate logic for node resolution and updating the flow. This adds extra burden when maintaining or improving the codebase, as new code may need to accommodate both response storage methods.

## Proposal

Add the ability to store user responses using the URL query string. This will become the default method for storing responses and replace use of the URL path. The ability to store responses in a session cookie will remain and require flow to explicitly enable it within configuration (current behaviour).

> To implement this change, we could leverage the existing code (controller, node resolution and flow updates) written for storing responses in a session. This is because the underlying data structure storing the responses is the same i.e. a hash keyed by node name. The only additional logic required is to retrieve and update the parameters in the query string instead from the session.

Author: I think so. As URLs will have the node name in the path e.g.

/marriage-abroad/y/**where-do-you-live**?marriage_country=afghanistan

we won't be able to pre-empt the what the name of the next node is in the question form. Smart Answers would need to know their response for the question, so they are redirected to the correct next node.

> To implement this change, we could leverage the existing code (controller, node resolution and flow updates) written for storing responses in a session. This is because the underlying data structure storing the responses is the same i.e. a hash keyed by node name. The only additional logic required is to retrieve and update the parameters in the query string instead from the session.

Reviewer 2: Oh yes, that makes sense. Double requests will live on.

What would happen if a user accessed a question path with a query string without sufficient answers?

> To implement this change, we could leverage the existing code (controller, node resolution and flow updates) written for storing responses in a session. This is because the underlying data structure storing the responses is the same i.e. a hash keyed by node name. The only additional logic required is to retrieve and update the parameters in the query string instead from the session.

Author: So users would be redirected to the first missing question - which is the existing behaviour of session based flows.

Example:
- `flow-name/y` => `flow-name/s/question1`
- `flow-name/y/response1` => `flow-name/s/question2?question1=response1`

> - `flow-name/y/response1/response2` => `flow-name/s/results?question1=response1&question2=question2`

Author: Ah yup - this is defo not clear. I'm proposing we use node ID (as defined in the flow definition) in the URL. Here's an example of real Smart Answer which I hope make's it clearer:

- `check-uk-visa/y` => `check-uk-visa/s/nationality`
- `check-uk-visa/y/australia` => `check-uk-visa/s/purpose?nationality=australia`
- `check-uk-visa/y/australia/tourism` => `check-uk-visa/s/result?purpose=tourism&nationality=australia`

I'll update this section to make the intent clearer.

I think using copy such as `question{x}` in URL may make it easier to read and more predictable. However, it doesn't fundamentally solve the problem listed in the previous section, for example `question2` could still potentially return different pages if the flow isn't a linear series of questions.

> - `flow-name/y/response1/response2` => `flow-name/s/results?question1=response1&question2=question2`

Author: Hopefully clarified [here](https://github.com/alphagov/smart-answers/pull/5212/commits/cc007788200e6084273ef0d767ed40e276dfe5f1)

> - `flow-name/y/response1/response2` => `flow-name/s/results?question1=response1&question2=question2`

Reviewer 2: Great thanks. I think the node id is better 👍  

Unlikely edge case alert, are we at any risk of two parameterised node ids conflicting? a scenario that comes to mind is a question suffixed with a question mark and a result that is the same name without the question mark.

> - `flow-name/y/response1/response2` => `flow-name/s/results?question1=response1&question2=question2`

Author: Yup a possibility, we'd have to make sure id's are unique within a flow. Some thing we need to keep in mind when we migrate existing flows.

> - `flow-name/y/response1/response2` => `flow-name/s/results?question1=response1&question2=question2`

Reviewer 2: Cool - I guess we might want to have the flow presenter be aware of paths anyway as they get more use in questions and answers. So it could be that a Flow raises an error if you define a colliding name. I guess without the flow being aware of the paths we'd need a bunch of `.gsub(/_/, "-")` and `parameterize` scattered around the code.

> - `flow-name/y/response1/response2` => `flow-name/s/results?question1=response1&question2=question2`

Author: For sure, probably something like former would be ideal - raising an error when reading in the initial flow definition.

Suggested steps for implementation:

> 1. Rename `SessionAnswersController` to `FlowController` (as will be used to handle all flows)

Author: Start page rendering behaviour is really confusing at the moment. The current behaviour is that:

- In our production, staging, integration environments, start pages are never rendered by Smart Answers and always Frontend
- In Heroku and developer environments, start pages are rendered by Smart Answers and by the SmartAnswersController, not the SessionAnswersController. We actually can't distinguish a session based vs path based smart answer at this point (`GET /flow_name`).

It's confusing because we [have code to render a start page in SessionAnswersController](https://github.com/alphagov/smart-answers/blob/b78e022315a6ce28108301638b09da6d4f1f8bc3/app/controllers/session_answers_controller.rb#L80), but it's never used. So collating controllers will clear that up. 

I'd really like to separate the start page rendering from the [controller method that renders the flow](https://github.com/alphagov/smart-answers/blob/b78e022315a6ce28108301638b09da6d4f1f8bc3/app/controllers/session_answers_controller.rb#L9). At the very least have a separate controller method, so we don't have to worry about non-production logic.

> 1. Rename `SessionAnswersController` to `FlowController` (as will be used to handle all flows)

Author: Going back to your original question - 

I think our nomenclature is all over the place. The noun "Smart Answer" isn't well defined - do we mean the application itself? a flow? a flow + start page? If it is just flow, then why not just call it a flow?

It doesn't help that we don't even stick to the definition of a flow. We [say it's a collection of question and outcome nodes ](https://github.com/alphagov/smart-answers#nomenclature), however [`start_node`](https://github.com/alphagov/smart-answers/blob/b78e022315a6ce28108301638b09da6d4f1f8bc3/app/presenters/flow_presenter.rb#L92) is a thing within the FlowPresenter.  Also we use [`smart_answer`](https://github.com/alphagov/smart-answers/blob/b78e022315a6ce28108301638b09da6d4f1f8bc3/app/controllers/smart_answers_controller.rb#L53) as variable name, when actually its just a Flow object 😭. 

There's definitely work to be done to clear all of this up. My feeling is that "FlowController" is a good first step, as at least generalises the name from `SessionAnswersController` and prevents naming conflict with existing `SmartAnswersController` whilst we migrate. Possibly something to come back to later?

> 1. Rename `SessionAnswersController` to `FlowController` (as will be used to handle all flows)

Reviewer 2: Ha, my brain 🤯  you've opened my eyes to the cans of worms - somewhat amusing given there are so few actions.

So with the move to FlowController would that handle questions, responses and visualisation? and SmartAnswerController would cover the index and start pages?

> 1. Rename `SessionAnswersController` to `FlowController` (as will be used to handle all flows)

Author: Ahah yup!

So we've currently got the following:

SmartAnswersController
- index (Index page)
- show (Start, questions and outcomes pages / Redirect to next question or outcome )
- visualise (Visualisation page)

SessionAnswersController
- start (Redirect to the first flow question)
- show (~Start~, question and outcome pages)
- update (Redirect to next question or outcome)
- destroy (Clear responses and redirect to start page)

Change to:

FlowController
- start (Redirect to the first flow question)
- show (Question and outcome pages)
- update (Redirect to next question or outcome)
- destroy (Clear responses and redirect to start page)

SmartAnswerController
- index (Index page)
- show (Start page)
- visualise (Visualisation page)

This seems like a good first step for what's in scope for the ADR. There is probably more we can do to tidy this up, for example improve controller names or method names, I'd like to defer that for now. Let me know if that makes sense, and if you agree I'll add this into the proposal.

> 1. Rename `SessionAnswersController` to `FlowController` (as will be used to handle all flows)

Reviewer 2: Thanks. Would visualise make more sense on FlowController since it's visualising a flow? Besides that controllers sound good. I think the action names on FlowController could use some work, how would you like to handle deferring that chat?

> 1. Rename `SessionAnswersController` to `FlowController` (as will be used to handle all flows)

Author: So I think moving `visualise` is also out of scope for this ADR, because SmartAnswerController is going to still exist and it's not necessary for implementing storing responses in query strings. Probably also is related to discussion about improving controller and controller method names/organisation. 

(I've wondered if we want to group the index, start and visualise pages together as they are all thing strictly made for development and not user facing things. But I know that goes against typical conventions. Anyways part of the separate discussion definitely worth having.)

Shall we make a GitHub issue for this? Or this something we'd want to put the Tech Debt board?

> 1. Rename `SessionAnswersController` to `FlowController` (as will be used to handle all flows)

Reviewer 2: Yeah since visualise is publicly available I tend to group it with the flow stuff and only consider the start pages and index as the dev views. We do also have the concept of a DevelopmentController in other frontend apps, well at least there is one in EmailAlertFrontend.

A GitHub issue sounds good. I don't think we've got too much of a debt, just something a bit confusing that can be bikeshedded a bit.

> 1. Rename `SessionAnswersController` to `FlowController` (as will be used to handle all flows)

Author: Started an issue #5225 - feel free to add anything I've missed.

1. Change `use_session` configuration option in flow definition to specify different response store types. e.g. `response_store :session`
1. Add functionality to store responses in query string

> 1. Migrate existing flows incrementally to use query string by specifying config option e.g. `response_store :query_string`

Author: Good catch. We need to cover those who are in the middle of doing a flow, and old links that might be saved.

Feels like there's scale of effort vs disruption for users and depends on the amount of traffic (how many user's would be effected).

Most effort, minimal disruption:
Add logic to translate old urls into new query string based ones.

Medium effort, medium disruption:
Redirect all old URLs to the start page.

Low effort, high disruption:
Drop the old routes for old URLs and 404.

Safest approach would be to:
1. Initially keep the existing controller to handle old URL requests (we can distinguish them by the extra `/y/` vs `/s/` segment after the flow name).
1. Add routes for both URL types in the content item (for router).
2. Update the start page to point to the query string based flow.
3. Keep an eye on traffic to the old URLs
4. Then decide on level of effort thats needed?

My gut feeling is we don't actually have that many people save URLs or link directly to results, and that we'd probably be fine to just redirect to the start page.

> 1. Migrate existing flows incrementally to use query string by specifying config option e.g. `response_store :query_string`

Reviewer 2: Yeah I think it's fine to have something that is intermediary and then remove. I think that could be neater too as we could set redirects in Publishing API for all the /y URL's at the point of removal and then not need any /y handling code in this app.

How do you feel about using this as a chance to change /s/ and /y/ to something more understandable? a quick idea I had is /flow/ ? Just a thought given it's going to be a bit disruptive anyway.

> 1. Migrate existing flows incrementally to use query string by specifying config option e.g. `response_store :query_string`

Author: Yup agree - should try and add the redirect in Publishing API. Would let us really clean everything up.

I think that's a good idea about renaming /s/ - I'm slightly worried about adding extra work to implement this change - (would have to migrating the existing session based answer (find-coronavirus-support) as well). I also wonder if it's worth, outside this ADR, thinking about whether we can remove it all together.

> 1. Migrate existing flows incrementally to use query string by specifying config option e.g. `response_store :query_string`

Reviewer 2: Great re: redirect

> I think that's a good idea about renaming /s/ - I'm slightly worried about adding extra work to implement this change - (would have to migrating the existing session based answer (find-coronavirus-support) as well). I also wonder if it's worth, outside this ADR, thinking about whether we can remove it all together.

Yeah getting rid altogether sounds ideal but I agree that's out of the scope of this.

I think the renaming should be in the scope of this as /s/ will leave a bit of a smell behind. The s stands for session as I recall? Since every other Smart Answer needs migrating anyway it'd seem the extra work is very low since it'd be a different application of the same process. Only tricky thing seems to be agreeing on what the rename should be 😁

> 1. Migrate existing flows incrementally to use query string by specifying config option e.g. `response_store :query_string`

Author: Sure, you are right it'll less work now than later. /flow/ does make sense - it's short and descriptive. Struggling to think of any alternatives,  maybe `/nodes/` (but prefer `flow`)?

Another thing is to make sure it's not going to confuse users who won't be familiar with these concepts.

> 1. Migrate existing flows incrementally to use query string by specifying config option e.g. `response_store :query_string`

Reviewer 2: Sounds good - yeah it seems a step up from /y/ anyway for confusion.

> 1. Migrate existing flows incrementally to use query string by specifying config option e.g. `response_store :query_string`

Author: I've added a section talking about the prerequisite work to update /s/ to /flow/ - including suggested step of implementation.

1. Make query string default response store for all flows
1. Remove deprecated code for storing responses in URL paths

## Consequences

Our caching effectiveness could be reduced due to different ordering of query parameters. For example, `flow-name/s/results?q1=r1&q2=r2` and `flow-name/s/results?q2=r2&q1=r1` would render the same page, however both hit origin. This is somewhat mitigated by sorting the parameters when generating URLs in Smart Answers, so that users are using the same ordering.

> Storing fewer responses in the URL due URL length limit. The length limit of a URL is about 2000 characters (varies between browsers, CDN providers, search engines etc). If the average node name and response is 12 characters, we still can store around 80 responses in the URL using the query string. This is more than enough for our existing flows.

Reviewer 3: We currently store responses in the URL structure, so all that the proposal is adding is a few characters per response (i.e. the `q1=` portion). And as you say, that has no bearing on any existing Smart Answer. Might be worth rephrasing it a bit to make it clear this isn't really a consequence:

```suggestion
Smart Answer responses will have longer URLs, as we'll now encode the node name of each question in the URL. Given that the length limit of a URL is about 2000 characters (varies between browsers, CDN providers, search engines etc), and the average node name and response is 12 characters, we can store around 80 responses in the URL using the query string. This is more than enough for our existing flows, the largest of which has X responses.
```

Author: Ah thanks for this - your suggestion is far clearer!
